New Jersey well today I'm setting off on
a journey that's way more unusual than
that down to the Earth's core and I'm
inviting you to join me are you ready I
come on it'll be fine let's go the
center of the earth lies about four
thousand miles below its surface so it's
going to be a long trip
the layer I'm smashing through right now
is the crust it's something like the
skin of an apple except you can't bite
off a piece when you compare it to the
other layers that make up the earth Hey
look at that rabbit those cuties dig
tunnels up to 2 feet deep so I'm not
actually surprised to meet it here and
gross with that an earthworm some of the
deep burrowing types also known as night
crawlers get big and can live ten feet
below the surface
moving on did you hear that beeping
sound that must be one of those gold
diggers a good metal detector still
works at this depth but you're not
likely to find any goal maybe a large
piece of metal like a car or something
and this must be the Mole Man burrow
seriously there was a guy in London who
was digging for 40 years under his house
and stopped at 26 feet what was he
looking for now remember how I said the
crust wasn't really that thick it's
roughly 21 miles thick and made up of
basaltic rocks that are under the sea
and granitic rocks that make up the
continents so there's oceanic crust and
continental crust
whoa-ho was that a crocodile Nile
crocodiles dig the deepest burrows among
all animals so you can find them at 39
feet underground hmm apparently not only
crocodiles feel the desire to hide from
the rest of the world there are whole
underground cities with shelters and
catacombs in different countries the
deepest of them lies at 278 feet under
Cappadocia in Turkey it's 18 levels
could house 20,000 people how would they
all get there today they could just
catch a train at the world's deepest
metro station in Kiev Ukraine lying at
348 feet while people have advanced
technologies these days to dig this deep
trees just naturally grow this way in
South Africa there are species whose
roots reach up to 400 feet below the
surface
I'm currently moving through continental
crust as you see and two important
things you should know about it are that
it's about 2 billion years old even
though the oldest rock is 4 billion and
it was found on the shore of Hudson Bay
Canada and it covers about 40% of the
earth yeah the rest is oceanic crust the
granite rocks that it's made of have
more silicon aluminium and even more
oxygen in them than basaltic rocks
because they have access to open air on
the surface the crust is the source of
all the metals and minerals humans have
ever used except for diamonds which are
much deeper I think we'll spot them
later
do you have pockets
what was that people in the running gear
as crazy as it sounds in 2004 a half
marathon was organized in the Boches
salt mine in Poland it was the deepest
half marathon ever you don't often see
people running at a depth of 695 feet
after all boy nothing can surprise me
now that I've seen this
except for maybe bats what are you guys
doing here 1000 brown bats spent every
winter in a New York zinc mine yeah how
cozy mmm it's getting cold this is the
deepest point you can find permafrost or
permanently frozen soil layer zap
speaking of frost the Earth's crust
serves as an electric blanket that
covers a mantle it's rich in the
radioactive elements uranium thorium and
potassium which produce heat moving on
this here looks like a good hiding spot
the deepest cave in the world is very
often a cave in Georgia
the country not the state at about one
point four miles below the ground and
that was a train I heard wait how could
a train possibly run this deep it
couldn't until 2016 when the deepest and
longest underground railway Gotthard
base tunnel was opened in Switzerland
just when you think you couldn't
possibly meet any other living beings
down here here comes the worm from the
Tohono mine in South Africa the deepest
multicellular organism
speaking of minds the deepest among them
is the map on a goldmine
at two and a half miles also in South
Africa well I'm moving through
continental crust the oceanic crust is
never too far and it's average depth is
4.3 miles
it covers around 60% of the surface of
our planet and is thinner around 12
miles denser and younger it's no older
than 180 million years then the
continental crust it's constantly being
born at mid-ocean ridges and that's what
makes the continents move at seven miles
deep you have your final chance to see
the ocean on this trip we've just
reached the Mariana Trench the deepest
point of the Pacific Ocean traveling
through the crust was fun but it had to
end at some point and here comes the
border where they don't stamp your
passport the boundary between the crust
and the mantle
it's the largest section of the earth at
1801 miles wide
it's made up of magma rock and is heavy
making up 65 percent of the Earth's mass
it stores many archaeological secrets
and is made up of four elements oxygen
silicon manganese and iron even though
it's basically a solid rock the mantle
is slowly and constantly moving
what was that bling it must be the
remnants of diamonds that were formed
here at 93 miles deep a billion years
ago then as molten rock they moved up to
the surface the pressure is getting more
and more extreme and it's getting colder
and colder down here this is the deepest
point where earthquakes are born the
ones that come from here are rare and
get pretty weak by the time they've
traveled 435 miles up to the surface
another 30 miles down on this journey
and here comes the lower mantle you can
thank it for any tectonic plate
movements oh why is it getting so hot
Wow that was some serious change of
landscape at 1814 miles deep the mantle
ends and the outer core begins it's a
sunless sea of superhot liquid metal
that's about the size of Mars this sea
has slow moving currents and magnetic
and electrical fields that produce
storms and cyclones by the way the earth
owes its magnetic field to the outer
core without it life on our planet would
simply be impossible once every several
thousand years something happens in this
layer the magnetic poles reverse and
North and South change places it's not
likely to happen again soon though at
2750 miles the inner core welcomes you
it's the hottest innermost part of the
planet it's a super dense solid ball
made of 80 percent iron and 20% nickel
that hates up to ten thousand eight
hundred degrees Fahrenheit that's pretty
much the same as the surface of the Sun
the inner core is nearly the size of the
moon and makes a 2% of the Earth's mass
if you took all the water in all the
oceans and multiplied it by five this
would be roughly the same as the volume
of the inner core it remains solid
thanks to super high pressure which is a
million times greater than the pressure
on the surface of the planet because no
one has been this deep except for us
right now da scientists have a lot of
research to do in this area some of them
believe small crystals of iron are born
in the outer parts of the core that
merge into giant crystals the size of a
city closer to the center that's why the
inner core is also called the crystal
core not so long ago British scientists
found out that the inner core is
relatively young probably somewhere
between 500 and a thousand million years
old and that's nothing in terms of earth
science
it's hard to tell exactly where the
center of the earth is but it looks like
I can put my flag down here at 3,950
eight miles now that was quite a journey
now for those of you who are thinking of
packing your bags to go see the Earth's
core I have some not so good notes it's
technically not possible yet because
there's no way to survive the pressure
and extreme heat that are waiting down
there however if someone built a tunnel
that would provide all the necessary
protection it would only take 18 minutes
of free-falling to get there hey sign me
up